I must not fear. Fear is the mind-killer. Fear is the little-death that brings total obliteration. I will face my fear. I will permit it to pass over me and through me. And when it has gone past I will turn the inner eye to see its path. Where the fear has gone there will be nothing. Only I will remain.
— Bene Gesserit Litany

A beginning is the time for taking the most delicate care that the balances are correct.
— Manual of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

The mystery of life isn't a problem to solve, but a reality to experience.
— Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

A process cannot be understood by stopping it. Understanding must move with the flow of the process, must join it and flow with it.
— The First Law of Mentat

Once men turned their thinking over to machines in the hope that this would set them free. But that only permitted other men with machines to enslave them.
— Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

Muad'Dib learned rapidly because his first training was in how to learn. And the first lesson of all was the basic trust that he could learn. It is shocking to find how many people do not believe they can learn, and how many more believe learning to be difficult. Muad'Dib knew that every experience carries its lesson.
— The Humanity of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

The person who takes the banal and ordinary and illuminates it in a new way can terrify. We do not want our ideas changed. We feel threatened by such demands.
— The Zensufi Master

Hope clouds observation.
— Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

Any road followed precisely to its end leads precisely nowhere. Climb the mountain just a little bit to test that it's a mountain. From the top of the mountain, you cannot see the mountain.
— Muad'Dib: Family Commentaries, Princess Irulan

A world is supported by four things: the learning of the wise, the justice of the great, the prayers of the righteous and the valor of the brave. But all of these are as nothing without a ruler who knows the art of ruling. Make that the science of your tradition.
— Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

To attempt an understanding of Muad'Dib without understanding his mortal enemies, the Harkonnens, is to attempt seeing Truth without knowing Falsehood. It is the attempt to see the Light without knowing Darkness. It cannot be.
— Manual of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Does the prophet see the future or does he see a line of weakness, a fault or cleavage that he may shatter with words or decisions as a diamond-cutter shatters his gem with a blow of a knife?
— Private Reflections on Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Arrakis teaches the attitude of the knife — chopping off what's incomplete and saying: "Now it's complete because it's ended here."
— Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Parting with friends is a sadness. A place is only a place.
— Thufir Hawat

Bless the Maker and all His Water. Bless the coming and going of Him. May His passing cleanse the world. May He keep the world for His people.
— Fremen saying

The flesh surrenders itself. Eternity takes back its own. Our bodies stirred these waters briefly, danced with a certain intoxication before the love of life and self, dealt with a few strange ideas, then submitted to the instruments of Time. What can we say of this? I occurred. I am not... yet, I occurred.
— Paul Muad'Dib Atreides

Greatness is a transitory experience. It is never persistent. It depends in part upon the myth-making imagination of humankind. The person who experiences greatness must have a feeling for the myth he is in. He must reflect what is projected upon him. And he must have a strong sense of the sardonic. This is what uncouples him from belief in his own pretensions.
— Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

There is no escape — we pay for the violence of our ancestors.
— Paul Muad'Dib

Muad'Dib could indeed see the Future, but you must understand the limits of this power. The vision of time is broad, but when you pass through it, time becomes a narrow door. And always, he fought the temptation to choose a clear, safe course, warning "That path leads ever down into stagnation."
— Arrakis Awakening, Princess Irulan

Atrocity is recognized as such by victim and perpetrator alike, by all who learn about it at whatever remove. Atrocity has no excuses, no mitigating argument. Atrocity never balances or rectifies the past. Atrocity merely arms the future for more atrocity.
— The Apocrypha of Muad'Dib

When religion and politics travel in the same cart, the riders believe nothing can stand in their way. Their movement becomes headlong — faster and faster and faster. They put aside all thought of obstacles and forget that a precipice does not show itself to the man in a blind rush until it's too late.
— Bene Gesserit proverb

The concept of progress acts as a protective mechanism to shield us from the terrors of the future.
— Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Mood? What has mood to do with it? You fight when the necessity arises — no matter the mood! Mood's a thing for cattle or making love or playing the baliset. It's not for fighting.
— Gurney Halleck

Think you of the fact that a deaf person cannot hear. Then, what deafness may we not all possess? What senses do we lack that we cannot see and cannot hear another world all around us?
— The Orange Catholic Bible

What do you despise? By this you are truly known.
— Manual of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

The person who takes the banal and ordinary and illuminates it in a new way can terrify. We do not want our ideas changed. We feel threatened by such demands. "I already know the important things!" we say. Then Changer comes and throws our old ideas away.
— The Zensufi Master

He was warrior and mystic, ogre and saint, the fox and the innocent, chivalrous, ruthless, less than a god, more than a man. There is no measuring Muad'Dib's motives by ordinary standards.
— Arrakis Awakening, Princess Irulan

Power attracts pathological personalities. It is not that power corrupts but that it is magnetic to the corruptible.
— Missionaria Protectiva, Text QIV

Seek freedom and become captive of your desires. Seek discipline and find your liberty.
— The Coda

The greatest obligation of a mother is to support her children, to show them love and respect, and to accept them. Sometimes this is a most difficult task.
— Lady Jessica, Duchess of Caladan

I tell you we are a marvel and my memories leave no doubt of this.
— The Stolen Journals

There is in each of us an ancient force that takes and an ancient force that gives. A man finds little difficulty facing that place within himself where the taking force dwells, but it's almost impossible for him to see into the giving force without changing into something other than man.
— Paul Muad'Dib

Paradox is a pointer telling you to look beyond it. If paradoxes bother you, that betrays your deep desire for absolutes. The relativist treats a paradox merely as interesting, perhaps amusing or even, dreadful thought, educational.
— Leto Atreides II

All governments suffer a recurring problem: power attracts pathological personalities. It is not that power corrupts but that it is magnetic to the corruptible. Such people have a tendency to become drunk on violence, a condition to which they are quickly addicted.
— Missionaria Protectiva

Bureaucracy destroys initiative. There is little that bureaucrats hate more than innovation, especially innovation that produces better results than the old routines. Improvements always make those at the top of the heap look inept.
— A Guide to Trial and Error in Government, Bene Gesserit Archive

Good government never depends upon laws, but upon the personal qualities of those who govern. The machinery of government is always subordinate to the will of those who administer that machinery. The most important element of government, therefore, is the method of choosing leaders.
— The Spacing Guild Manual

Give me the judgment of balanced minds in preference to laws every time. Codes and manuals create patterned behavior. All patterned behavior tends to go unquestioned, gathering destructive momentum.
— Darwi Odrade

The haze of nostalgia covers their days among their sisters, making those days into something different than they were. That's the way today changes history. All contemporaries do not inhabit the same time. The past is always changing, but few realize it.
— The Stolen Journals

The trance-state of prophecy is like no other visionary experience. It is not a retreat from the raw exposure of the senses, but an immersion in a multitude of new movements. Things move. It is an ultimate pragmatism in the midst of Infinity, a demanding consciousness where you come at last into the unbroken awareness that the universe moves of itself.
— The Stolen Journals

You must remember that I have at my internal demand every expertise known to our history. To those who dare ask why I behave as I do, I say: With my memories, I can do nothing else. I am not a coward and once I was human.
— The Stolen Journals

Without change, something sleeps inside us and seldom wakes. The sleeper must awaken.
— Duke Leto Atreides

The power to destroy a thing is the absolute control over it.
— Paul Muad'Dib

The concept of progress acts as a protective mechanism to shield us from the terrors of the future.
— Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib

Do not count what you have lost. Count only what you still have.
— Zensunni Sutra of the First Order

Intelligence takes chance with limited data in an arena where mistakes are not only possible but also necessary.
— Darwi Odrade

There's no secret to balance. You just have to feel the waves.
— Darwi Odrade

Show me a completely smooth operation and I'll show you someone who's covering mistakes. Real boats rock.
— Senior Watchdog, Bene Gesserit

Live the best life you can. Life is a game whose rules you learn if you leap into it and play it to the hilt. Otherwise, you are caught off balance, continually surprised by the shifting play.
— Darwi Odrade

Laws to suppress tend to strengthen what they would prohibit. This is the fine point on which all the legal professions of history have based their job security.
— Bene Gesserit Coda

Education is no substitute for intelligence. That elusive quality is defined only in part by puzzle-solving ability. It is in the creation of new puzzles reflecting what your senses report that you round out the definitions.
— Mentat Text One

The life of a single human, as the life of a family or an entire people, persists as memory. My people must come to see this as part of their maturing process. Much that is stored can be lost in that chance play of accident which we call "fate."
— The Book of Leto

Ready comprehension is often a knee-jerk response and the most dangerous form of understanding. It blinks an opaque screen over your ability to learn. Be warned. Understand nothing. All comprehension is temporary.
— Mentat Fixe

To know a thing well, know its limits. Only when pushed beyond its tolerances will true nature be seen. Do not depend only on theory if your life is at stake.
— Bene Gesserit Commentary

When you think to take determination of your fate into your own hands, that is the moment you can be crushed. Be cautious. Allow for surprises. When we create, there are always other forces at work.
— Darwi Odrade

Most discipline is hidden discipline, designed not to liberate but to limit. Do not ask Why? Be cautious with How? Why? leads inexorably to paradox. How? traps you in a universe of cause and effect. Both deny the infinite.
— The Apocrypha of Arrakis

The greatest palatinate earl and the lowliest stipendiary serf share the same problem. You cannot hire a mentat or any other intellect to solve it for you. There's no writ of inquest or calling of witnesses to provide answers. No servant can dress the wound. You dress it yourself or continue bleeding for all to see.
— Hayt, the ghola

Often I must speak other than I think. That is called diplomacy.
— Stilgar

If you need something to worship, then worship life — all life, every last crawling bit of it! We're all in this beauty together!
— Paul Muad'Dib Atreides

Here lies a toppled god — His fall was not a small one. We did but build his pedestal, A narrow and a tall one.
— Tleilaxu Epigram

What is justice? Two forces collide. Each may have the right in his own sphere. And here's where an Emperor commands orderly solutions. Those collisions he cannot prevent — he solves. How? In the simplest way: he decides.
— Hayt, the ghola

Every civilization must contend with an unconscious force which can block, betray or countermand almost any conscious intention of the collectivity.
— Tleilaxu Theorem

No matter how exotic human civilization becomes, no matter the developments of life and society nor the complexity of the machine/human interface, there always come interludes of lonely power when the course of humankind depends upon the relatively simple actions of single individuals.
— The Tleilaxu Godbuk

The convoluted wording of legalisms grew up around the necessity to hide from ourselves the violence we intend toward each other. Between depriving a man of one hour from his life and depriving him of his life there exists only a difference of degree.
— Addenda to Orders in Council, Paul Muad'Dib

There exists a limit to the force even the most powerful may apply without destroying themselves. Judging this limit is the true artistry of government. Misuse of power is the fatal sin.
— Muad'Dib on Law, The Stilgar Commentary

Seek freedom and become captive of your desires. Seek discipline and find your liberty.
— The Coda

When a creature has developed into one thing, he will choose death rather than change into his opposite.
— Scytale

God's command comes; so seek not to hasten it. God's it is to show the way; and some do swerve from it.
— Stilgar

There is in all things a pattern that is part of our universe. It has symmetry, elegance, and grace — those qualities you find always in that which the true artist captures. You can find it in the turning of the seasons, in the way sand trails along a ridge, in the branch clusters of the creosote bush or the pattern of its leaves.
— Collected Sayings of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Governments, if they endure, always tend increasingly toward aristocratic forms. No government in history has been known to evade this pattern. And as the aristocracy develops, government tends more and more to act exclusively in the interests of the ruling class.
— Politics as Repeat Phenomenon: Bene Gesserit Training Manual

Above all else, the mentat must be a generalist, not a specialist. It is wise to have decisions of great moment monitored by generalists. Experts and specialists lead you quickly into chaos.
— The Mentat Handbook

Any training school for free citizens must begin by teaching distrust, not trust. It must teach questioning, not acceptance of stock answers.
— Cammar Pilru

Discovery is dangerous... but so is life. A man unwilling to take risk is doomed never to learn, never to grow, never to live.
— Planetologist Pardot Kynes

Life improves the capacity of the environment to sustain life. Life binds more energy into the system through the tremendous chemical interplay from organism to organism.
— Imperial Planetologist Pardot Kynes

The highest function of ecology is the understanding of consequences.
— Pardot Kynes

Life — all life — is in the service of life.
— Pardot Kynes

The thing the ecologically illiterate don't realize about an ecosystem is that it's a system. A system maintains a certain fluid stability that can be destroyed by a misstep in just one niche. A system has order, a flowing from point to point. If something dams the flow, order collapses.
— Pardot Kynes

Beyond a critical point within a finite space, freedom diminishes as numbers increase. This is as true of humans as it is of gas molecules in a sealed flask. The human question is not how many can possibly survive within the system, but what kind of existence is possible for those who do survive.
— Pardot Kynes

Any path that narrows future possibilities may become a lethal trap. Humans are not threading their way through a maze; they scan a vast horizon filled with unique opportunities.
— The Spacing Guild Handbook

When did you last hear of a clerk giving his life for the company? Perhaps your deficiency rests in the false assumption that you can order men to think and cooperate. Men must want to do things of their own innermost drives. People, not commercial organizations or chains of command, are what make great civilizations work.
— A Letter to CHOAM, attributed to The Preacher

Church and State, scientific reason and faith, the individual and his community, even progress and tradition — all of these can be reconciled in the teachings of Muad'Dib. He taught us that there exists no intransigent opposites except in the beliefs of men.
— The Preacher at Arrakeen

Is your religion real when it costs you nothing and carries no risk? Is your religion real when you fatten upon it? Is your religion real when you commit atrocities in its name?
— Paul Atreides

Religion is the emulation of the adult by the child. Religion is the encystment of past beliefs: mythology, which is guesswork, the assumptions of trust in the universe, those pronouncements which men have made in search of personal power, all of it mingled with shreds of enlightenment. And always the ultimate unspoken commandment is "Thou shalt not question!"
— The Sisterhood's Credo

Let there be no doubt that I am the assemblage of our ancestors, the arena in which they exercise my moments. They are my cells and I am their body. This is the fravashi of which I speak, the soul, the collective unconscious, the source of archetypes, the repository of all trauma and joy.
— The Stolen Journals

I have come to believe that holy boredom is good and sufficient reason for the invention of free will.
— Inscription on the storehouse at Dar-es-Balat

Enemies strengthen you. Allies weaken. I tell you this in the hope that it will help you understand why I act as I do in the full knowledge that great forces accumulate in my Empire with but one wish — the wish to destroy me.
— The Stolen Journals

Governments may rise and fall for reasons which appear insignificant. What small events! An argument between two women... which way the wind blows on a certain day... a sneeze, a cough. It is not always the majestic concerns of Imperial ministers which dictate the course of history.
— The Preacher

Peace demands solutions, but we never reach living solutions; we only work toward them. A fixed solution is, by definition, a dead solution. The trouble with peace is that it tends to punish mistakes instead of rewarding brilliance.
— The Words of My Father

Church and State, scientific reason and faith, the individual and his community — even progress and tradition — all of these can be reconciled. He taught us that there exists no intransigent opposites except in the beliefs of men. Anyone can rip aside the veil of Time.
— The Preacher at Arrakeen

No sweeteners will cloak some forms of bitterness. If it tastes bitter, spit it out. That's what our earliest ancestors did.
— The Coda

Enter no conflict against fanatics unless you can defuse them. Oppose a religion with another religion only if your proofs are irrefutable or if you can mesh in a way that the fanatics accept you as god-inspired.
— Missionaria Protectiva, Primary Teaching

Most civilization is based on cowardice. It's so easy to civilize by teaching cowardice. You water down the standards which would lead to bravery. You restrain the will. You regulate the appetites. You fence in the horizons. You make a law for every movement. You deny the existence of chaos. You teach even the children to breathe slowly. You tame.
— The Stolen Journals

It is difficult to live in the present, pointless to live in the future, and impossible to live in the past.
— Leto Atreides II

Some believe that you must compromise integrity with a certain amount of dirty work before you can put genius to work. Moneo says my solution is to stay within the sanctus, sending others to do my dirty work.
— The Stolen Journals

I have created what I intended — a powerful spiritual tension throughout my Empire. Few sense the strength of it. The only power I possess is the control of individual prosperity. That is the sum of all the things I do.
— The Stolen Journals

What is the most immediate danger to my stewardship? I will tell you. It is a true visionary, a person who has stood in the presence of God with the full knowledge of where he stands.
— The Stolen Journals

I am all of God that need be seen. I am the word become a miracle. I am all of my ancestors. Is that not miracle enough? What more could you possibly want?
— Leto Atreides II

Power bases are very dangerous because they attract people who are truly insane, people who seek power only for the sake of power.
— Leto Atreides II

The defiling of a god is an ancient human tradition. Why should I be an exception?
— Leto Atreides II

There are inevitably more than enough words. And someday, my journals will be discovered — more words. I warn you that you read my words at your peril. The wordless movement of terrible events lies just below their surface. Be deaf! You do not need to hear or, hearing, you do not need to remember. How soothing it is to forget. And how dangerous.
— Leto Atreides II

What am I? The ultimate loner forced to look at what might have been. Every day I look at it.
— Leto Atreides II

You have square thoughts which resist circles.
— The Stolen Journals

In all of my universe I have seen no law of nature, unchanging and inexorable. This universe presents only changing relationships which are sometimes seen as laws by short-lived awareness. These fleshy sensoria which we call self are ephemera withering in the blaze of infinity.
— The Stolen Journals

We are primal elements linking one piece of Time to another. And when we have passed, everything behind us will drop off into no-sound, a place like the no-room of the Ixians, yet never again the same as it was before we came.
— Moneo

How persistent it is, this demand that our gods be perfect. The Greeks were much more reasonable about such things.
— Leto Atreides II

As long as there is life, every ending is a beginning. And I would save humankind, even from itself. This is why no death in the perpetuation of humankind can be a complete failure. This is why a birth touches us so deeply.
— Leto Atreides II

The prophet utters fateful words. You glimpse a thing "destined to occur." But the prophetic instant releases something of infinite portent and power. The universe undergoes a ghostly shift. Thus, the wise prophet conceals actuality behind shimmering labels.
— The Stolen Journals

The realization of what I am occurs in the timeless awareness which does not stimulate nor delude. I create a field without self or center, a field where even death becomes only analogy. I desire no results.
— The Stolen Journals

Muad'Dib's teachings have become the playground of scholastics, of the superstitious and the corrupt. He taught a balanced way of life, a philosophy with which a human can meet problems arising from an ever-changing universe. He said humankind is still evolving, in a process which will never end.
— Words of the Mentat Duncan Idaho

You've heard of animals chewing off a leg to escape a trap? There's an animal kind of trick. A human would remain in the trap, endure the pain, feigning death that he might kill the trapper and remove a threat to his kind.
— Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

The universe is God's. It is one thing, a wholeness against which all separations may be identified. Transient life, even the self-aware and reasoning life which we call sentient, holds only fragile trusteeship on any portion of the wholeness.
— Commentaries from the C.E.T.

Either we abandon the long-honored Theory of Relativity, or we cease to believe that we can engage in continued accurate prediction of the future. How, then, do we explain the continued seeking after this visionary goal by respected scientists? How, then, do we explain Muad'Dib?
— Lectures on Prescience by Harq al-Ada

This was Muad'Dib's achievement: He saw the subliminal reservoir of each individual as an unconscious bank of memories going back to the primal cell of our common genesis. Muad'Dib set himself the task of integrating genetic memory into ongoing evaluation. Thus did he break through Time's veils, making a single thing of the future and the past.
— Testament of Arrakis by Harq al-Ada

I give you the desert chameleon, whose ability to blend itself into the background tells you all you need to know about the roots of ecology and the foundations of a personal identity.
— Book of Diatribes from the Hayt Chronicles

I will not argue with the Fremen claims that they are divinely inspired to transmit a religious revelation. It is their concurrent claim to ideological revelation which inspires me to shower them with derision. Short-term expediency always fails in the long-term.
— The Preacher at Arrakeen

All states are abstractions.
— Octun Politicus, Bene Gesserit Archives

Some actions have an end but no beginning; some begin but do not end. It all depends upon where the observer is standing.
— Leto

Not knowing what you said, you said it.
— Leto, to Stilgar

All proofs inevitably lead to propositions which have no proof. All things are known because we want to believe in them.
— The Lady Jessica, to Bene Gesserit delegation

It is said that the only fear we cannot correct is the fear of our own mistakes.
— Stilgar

Often there's no need to tear off an arm to remove a splinter.
— Stilgar

This is the awe-inspiring universe of magic: There are no atoms, only waves and motions all around. This universe cannot be seen, cannot be heard, cannot be detected in any way by fixed perceptions. It is the ultimate void where no preordained screens occur upon which forms may be projected. You have only one awareness here — the screen of the magi: Imagination!
— The Atreides Manifesto, Bene Gesserit Archives

Technology, in common with many other activities, tends toward avoidance of risks by investors. Uncertainty is ruled out if possible. Capital investment follows this rule, since people generally prefer the predictable. Few recognize how destructive this can be, how it imposes severe limits on variability and thus makes whole populations fatally vulnerable to the shocking ways our universe can throw the dice.
— Assessment of Ix, Bene Gesserit Archives

In my estimation, more misery has been created by reformers than by any other force in human history. Show me someone who says "Something must be done!" and I will show you a head full of vicious intentions that have no other outlet. What we must strive for always is to find the natural flow and go with it.
— The Reverend Mother Taraza

When strangers meet, great allowances should be made for differences of custom and training.
— The Lady Jessica, Wisdom of Arrakis

Four things cannot be hidden — love, smoke, a pillar of fire and a man striding across the open bled.
— Hayt

The three legs of the agreement-tripod are desire, data and doubt. Accuracy and honesty have nothing to do with it. Desire brings the participants together. Data sets the limits of their dialogue. Doubt frames their questions.
— Leto Atreides II to Siona

A sophisticated human can become primitive. What this really means is that the human's way of life changes. Old values change, become linked to the landscape with its plants and animals. When a human gains this knowledge and respect, that is called "being primitive."
— Liet-Kynes, The Arrakis Workbook

Some people never observe anything. Life just happens to them. They get by on little more than a kind of dumb persistence, and they resist with anger and resentment anything that might lift them out of that false serenity.
— Mother Superior Taraza

Because of the one-pointed Time awareness in which the conventional mind remains immersed, humans tend to think of everything in a sequential, word-oriented framework. This mental trap produces very short-term concepts of effectiveness and consequences, a condition of constant, unplanned response to crises.
— Liet-Kynes, The Arrakis Workbook

At the quantum level our universe can be seen as an indeterminable place, predictable in a statistical way only when you employ large enough numbers. Between that universe and a relatively predictable one, other forces come into play. For the in-between universe where we find our daily lives, that which you believe is a dominant force.
— Analysis of the Tyrant, the Taraza File

A man who reads only one book is more dangerous than a man who reads none.
— Bene Gesserit saying

Good intentions can bring about as much destruction as an evil conqueror. Either way, the result is the same.
— Zensunni Lament

There is a certain momentum to victory... and to defeat.
— Iblis Ginjo

He who strikes fastest strikes twice.
— Swordmaster Jav Barri

Words are magic.
— Zufa Cenva

Thoughts become weapons. Philosophies are distinct reasons for war. Good intentions are the most destructive arsenal of all.
— Cogitor Kwyna

When I am weaker than you, I ask you for freedom because that is according to your principles; when I am stronger than you, I take away your freedom because that is according to my principles.
— Words of an ancient philosopher, attributed by Harq al-Ada

The wise person views history as a set of lessons to be learned, choices and ramifications to be considered and discussed, and mistakes that should never again be made.
— Princess Irulan, History of the Butlerian Jihad

No one is ever completely forced into his position in life. We all have opportunities to take different paths.
— Conversations with Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Memories and lies are painful. But my memories are not lies.
— Bronso of IX

It is said that one can neither play nor hear the true beauty of music without first having experienced considerable pain. Alas, that may be why I find music to be so sweet.
— Gurney Halleck, Unfinished Songs

Sometimes the best way to search is to be found.
— Zensunni postulate

Facts mean nothing when they are preempted by appearance. Do not underestimate the power of impression over reality.
— Crown Prince Raphael Corrino

Brutality breeds brutality. Love breeds love.
— Lady Anirul Corrino

The natural destiny of power is fragmentation.
— Padishah Emperor Idriss I

There are countless definitions and interpretations of a life well spent, and of the opposite. The same individual can be either demon or saint, and even shades of both.
— The Wisdom of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

When the true motive is love, there are no other explanations. Searching for them is like chasing grains of sand in the wind.
— Fremen proverb

Select your battles carefully. Ultimately, victory and defeat are a matter of your own careful — or reckless — choices.
— Tlaloc, Weaknesses of the Empire

There is no such thing as the future. Humankind faces multiple possible futures, many of which hinge on seemingly inconsequential events.
— The Muadru Chronicles

Secrets give birth to more secrets.
— A Saying of Arrakis

With all the artillery, ships and manpower in the military, our commanders often forget that ideas can be the greatest weapon of all.
— Cogitor Kwyna

The more I study the phenomenon of human creativity, the more mysterious it seems. Their whole process of innovation is elusive, but is critical for us to understand. If we fail in this endeavor, thinking machines are doomed.
— Erasmus

Everything in the universe contains flaws, ourselves included. Even God does not attempt perfection in His creations. Only humankind has such foolish arrogance.
— Cogitor Kwyna

Science: the creation of dilemmas by the solutions of mysteries.
— Norma Cenva

A tool wielded in ignorance can become the most dangerous of weapons.
— Swordmaster Jav Barri

Those who refuse to fight against thinking machines are traitors to the human race. Those who do not use every possible weapon are fools.
— Zufa Cenva

Sand keeps the skin clean, and the mind.
— Zensunni fire poetry from Arrakis

Home can be anywhere, for it is a part of one's self.
— Zensunni saying

In the desert, the line between life and death is sharp and quick.
— Zensunni fire poetry from Arrakis

There's an unwritten compact between you and the reader. If someone enters a bookstore and sets down hard earned money for your book, you owe that person some entertainment and as much more as you can give.
— Frank Herbert, Foreword to Heretics of Dune

Looking back on it, I realize I did the right thing instinctively. You don't write for success. That takes part of your attention away from the writing. If you're really doing it, that's all you're doing: writing.
— Frank Herbert, Foreword to Heretics of Dune

Much that was called religion has carried an unconscious attitude of hostility toward life. True religion must teach that life is filled with joys pleasing to the eye of God, that knowledge without action is empty. All men must see that the teaching of religion by rules and rote is largely a hoax.
— C.E.T. Commentaries

Religion must remain an outlet for people who say to themselves, "I am not the kind of person I want to be." It must never sink into an assemblage of the self-satisfied.
— Last words of Toure Bomoko

Men, finding no answers to the sunnah now apply their own reasoning. All men seek to be enlightened. Religion is but the most ancient and honorable way in which men have striven to make sense out of God's universe. Scientists seek the lawfulness of events. It is the task of Religion to fit man into this lawfulness.
— C.E.T. Liturgical Manual

We were speaking of the throne, Majesty. When I am Duke in Arrakeen, do you think I'll have time to concern myself with every detail of governing? Do you think I wish to cut off my right arm?
— Paul Muad'Dib to Stilgar

I cannot let it be. Yet the storm was gathering.
— Paul Muad'Dib, on the coming Jihad

You cannot back into the future.
— Paul Muad'Dib to Chani

I must rule with eye and claw — as the hawk among lesser birds.
— Duke Leto Atreides

A popular man arouses the jealousy of the powerful.
— Thufir Hawat

Let us not rail about justice as long as we have arms and the freedom to use them.
— Duke Leto Atreides

God created Arrakis to train the faithful.
— The Wisdom of Muad'Dib, Princess Irulan

Polish comes from the cities; wisdom from the desert.
— Arrakeen villager saying

Be prepared to appreciate what you meet.
— Fremen proverb

Four things cannot be hidden: love, smoke, a pillar of fire, and a man striding across the open bled.
— Hayt

There is no guilt or innocence in you. All of that is past. Guilt belabors the dead and I am not the Iron Hammer. You multitude of the dead are merely people who have done certain things, and the memory of those things illuminates my path.
— Leto II to His Memory-Lives

Some actions have an end but no beginning; some begin but do not end. It all depends upon where the observer is standing.
— Leto Atreides II

If you believe certain words, you believe their hidden arguments. When you believe something is right or wrong, true or false, you believe the assumptions in the words which express the arguments. Such assumptions are often full of holes, but remain most precious to the convinced.
— The Open-Ended Proof from The Panoplia Prophetica

Muad'Dib was disinherited and he spoke for the disinherited of all time. He cried out against that profound injustice that alienates the individual from that which he was taught to believe, from that which seems to come to him as a right.
— The Mahdinate, An Analysis by Harq al-Ada

The spirit of Muad'Dib is more than words, more than the letter of the Law that arises from his name. It is that inner outrage against the complacently powerful, against the charlatans and the dogmatic fanatics.
— The Fedaykin Compact

All Planetologists see life as expressions of energy and look for the overriding relationships. In small pieces, bits and parcels which grow into general understanding, the Fremen racial wisdom is translated into a new certainty.
— The Arrakeen Catastrophe

The most profound things are inexpressible.
— Fremen saying

You do not take from this universe. It grants you what it will.
— Paul Muad'Dib

Was it defeat to choose a lesser evil?
— Paul Muad'Dib

What senses do we lack that we cannot see another world all around us?
— Orange Catholic Bible

Any delusions of Free Will he harbored now must be merely the prisoner rattling his cage. His curse lay in the fact that he saw the cage. He saw it!
— Paul Muad'Dib

You think power may be the most unstable of all human achievements? Then what of the apparent exceptions to this inherent instability? Some families endure. Very powerful religious bureaucracies have been known to endure. Consider the relationship between faith and power.
— The Stolen Journals

I give you eons of life which slips gently toward death without fuss or stirring, without even asking "Why?" I show you the false happiness and the shadow-catastrophe called Leto, the God Emperor. Now, will you learn the real happiness?
— The Stolen Journals

I assure you from a God's Olympian perch that government is a shared myth. When the myth dies, the government dies.
— Leto Atreides II to Moneo

There is a man so wise, He jumped into a sandy place and burnt out both his eyes! And when he knew his eyes were gone, He offered no complaint. He summoned up a vision and made himself a saint.
— Children's verse from History of Muad'Dib

It is not always the same thing to be a good man and a good citizen.
— Aristotle of Old Earth

O you who know what we suffer here, do not forget us in your prayers.
— Inscription over the exit of the Arrakeen landing field

Where I am flame, be thou the coals. Where I am dew, be thou the water.
— Chani to Paul

The sand beach as gray as a dead cheek, a green tideflow reflects cloud ripples; I stand on the dark wet edge. Cold foam cleanses my toes. I smell driftwood smoke. Words I wrote when told of Ghani's death.
— Leto Atreides II, from His Voice

Let me but imagine a topic and I have them in all of their glory — every image intact, every moan, every grimace. Joys of motherhood, and the birthing beds are mine. Serial baby smiles and the sweet cooings of new generations. The first walkings of toddlers and the first victories of youths brought forth for me to share. They tumble one upon another until I can see little else but sameness and repetition. Keep it all intact, I warn myself. Who can deny the value of such experiences? Ahhh, but it's the past. Don't you understand? It's only the past!
— Reading from Leto's journals

Sacred! As with all things sacred, it gives with one hand and takes with the other.
— Excerpts from the Death Interview with Bronso of IX

I was brought to this cell by your Priests. As with all Priests, you learned early to call the truth heresy.
— Bronso of IX

Cynicism! That, no doubt is a greater crime than heresy.
— Bronso of IX

The Eye that looks ahead to the safe course is closed forever.
— Paul Muad'Dib to the Guild navigators

Such a rich store of myths enfolds Paul Muad'Dib, the Mentat Emperor, and his sister, Alia. Their catastrophe was the catastrophe of all mankind. This work is dedicated, then, not to Muad'Dib or his sister, but to their heirs — to all of us.
— Dedication in the Muad'Dib Concordance

I have said: "Blow out the lamp! Day is here!" And you keep saying: "Give me a lamp so I can find the day."
— Bijaz to Hayt

Odd as it may seem, great struggles such as the one you can see emerging from my journals are not always visible to the participants. Much depends on what people dream in the secrecy of their hearts. I have always been as concerned with the shaping of dreams as with the shaping of actions.
— The Stolen Journals

The Guild navigators, gifted with limited prescience, had made the fatal decision: they'd chosen always the clear, safe course that leads ever downward into stagnation.
— Narrator

You should never be in the company of anyone with whom you would not want to die.
— Duncan Idaho, reciting a Fremen saying

Like many culinary delicacies, revenge is a dish best savored slowly, after long and delicate preparation.
— The Padishah Emperor

Remember that there exists a certain malevolence about the formation of any social order. It is the struggle for existence by an artificial entity. Despotism and slavery hover at the edges. Many injuries occur and, thus, the need for laws.
— The Stolen Journals

I have seen it fulfilled thousands of times! People call it a power, a gift. It's an affliction! It won't let me leave my life where I found it!
— Paul Muad'Dib

There are problems in this universe for which there are no answers. Nothing. Nothing can be done.
— Paul Muad'Dib

Belief can be manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.
— Scytale

Reason is the first victim of strong emotion.
— Scytale

What you of the CHOAM directorate seem unable to understand is that you seldom find real loyalties in commerce. Men must want to do things of their own innermost drives. People, not commercial organizations or chains of command, are what make great civilizations work. Every civilization depends upon the quality of the individuals it produces.
— A letter to CHOAM, attributed to The Preacher

It was the Fremen custom to treat distant people as hostile until they threw sand into the air. Thrown sand is a profound gesture. It says: We share the same burden. Sand is our only enemy.
— Leto Atreides II

Thinking you know why you behave as you do gives you all sorts of excuses for extraordinary behavior.
— Duncan Idaho

The one-eyed view of our universe says you must not look far afield for problems. Such problems may never arrive. Instead, tend to the wolf within your fences. The packs ranging outside may not even exist.
— The Azhar Book

To stay awake all night adds a day to your life.
— Stilgar

I never thought it would be easy to serve God. I just didn't think it would be this hard.
— Hwi Noree

You know it's love when you want to give joy and damn the consequences.
— Hwi Noree

Hwi helps me. We had something few experience. We were joined in our strengths rather than in our weaknesses. And look what it got you! Yes, and pray that you get the same!
— Exchange between Leto Atreides II and Siona

My Uncle Malky always said that love was a bad bargain because you get no guarantees. You're stupid. Love needs no guarantees.
— Hwi Noree

We witness a passing phase of eternity. Important things happen but some people never notice. Accidents intervene. You are not present at episodes. You depend on reports. And people shutter their minds. What good are reports?
— Darwi Odrade

Ultimately all things are known because we want to believe we know.
— Zensunni koan

Confine yourself to observing and you always miss the point of your own life. The object can be stated this way: Live the best life you can.
— Darwi Odrade

The army fosters technology, and technology breeds anarchy because it distributes the terrible machines of destruction. One man alone could create and apply enough violence to ravage an entire planet. It happened! Why do you think the computer became anathema?
— Serena Butler

There is a certain momentum to victory... and to defeat.
— Iblis Ginjo

In truth, is it better to remember or to forget? We must balance this decision between our history and our humanity.
— Bashar Abulurd Harkonnen, Private Logs

When others place impossible expectations on a man, he must redefine his goals, and forge his own path. That way at least someone is satisfied.
— Swordmaster Istian Goss

It has often been said that it is better to rule in Hell than serve in Heaven. This is defeatist talk: I intend to rule everywhere, not just in Hell.
— The Titan Agamemnon

Life is not a problem to be solved but a reality to be experienced.
— Fremen teaching

Try looking into that place where you dare not look! You'll find me there, staring out at you!
— Paul Muad'Dib to Reverend Mother Gaius Helen Mohiam

Expect only what happens in the fight. That way you'll never be surprised.
— Duncan Idaho, the Swordsmaster of the Ginaz

Do not be trapped by the need to achieve anything. This way, you achieve everything.
— Hayt, the ghola

There is no guilt or innocence in you. All of that is past. Guilt belabors the dead and I am not the Iron Hammer.
— Leto II

It is said of Muad'Dib that once when he saw a weed trying to grow between two rocks, he moved one of the rocks. Later, when the weed was seen to be flourishing, he covered it with the remaining rock. "That was its fate," he explained.
— The Commentaries
